# Philosophy of Newtonian Mechanics

There is an underlying [dogmatism in Newtonian
mechanics](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/newton-principia). Once you create
a model, specify the forces and initial conditions _the system's state
is known for all time_. There can be other systems that interact with
your model, but those systems all follow Newtonian mechanics. 

There's no room for uncertainty in Newtonian mechanics. Every change in
velocity is due to a force acting on an object. The universe becomes
more like clockwork in this framework. Something set the universe in
motion and its has been moving ever since. 

Some people claim that quantum mechanics accounts for the uncertainty in
the world, but the laws of quantum mechanics are derived from Newtonian
equations with an added variable for the "wave function" of a particle.
It adds useful tools to analyze systems that might not have initial
conditions, but it is still derived from ideas regarding cause and effect. 

## Cause and effect in Newton's universe

In the Newtonian universe, every effect is due to a cause and that cause
is the result of some other effect, 

_Every body perseveres in its state of being at rest or of moving
uniformly straight forward except insofar as it is compelled to change
its state by forces impressed._ - Isaac Newton, _Principia_

This principle has been used to describe the motion of the moon, stars,
and comets. The path of the moon has been correctly predicted for the
last century using Newtonian mechanics and gravitation. 

## Free will in Newton's universe

How does __free will__ play a role in Newton's universe? 

Some philosophers try to separate physical laws from beings with free
will, but this can be a slippery slope. We can point to a brain as
something that makes decisions and is the _cause_ of environmental
changes, but what caused the brain to create a _cause_? It must have had
some external stimulus to create an idea. In that sense, its a
sophisticated feedback loop, but it is still subject to physical laws
since it is made of physical connections. 

Other philosophers might say that Newton's universe is all there is. If
we had a big enough computer, we could create and solve a universal
equation of motion and _see_ the future. In this view, everything that
will happen was destined to happen based upon some initial conditions in
the universe. 

## What do you think?

Are humans and animals above Newton's laws of motion? or are we trapped
in a universe going through the motions of something out of our control?
